
S&P 500 Daily Movements Final Report


link to jupyter notebook with findings: https://github.com/jlatouche7/S-P-500-Weekly-Model/blob/a1af5f48b1ca2c211b57b0290f1d206f3e37dd56/SP500%20-%20Daily%20Final%20(2).ipynb](https://github.com/jlatouche7/S-P-500-Weekly-Model/blob/d05f9b22eadf4c0b6882d671bda5edbac22484ba/SP500%20-%20Daily%20Final%20(4).ipynb)

Question: How can small companies leverage and effectively invest their extra resources so they can become a more profitable company or scale up in size?

Problem: The S&P 500 is often used to gauge general market trends, and many people consider it to be a gauge of the overall economic health of the United States. Many companies, especially smaller companies, lack the resources and tools to invest their extra funds properly. My goal is to give these companies a tool that can give them a general idea of the S&P 500’s upcoming movements. A model that can predict the S&P 500’s long-term movements and week-to-week returns could be very useful to the company in determining entry and exit points for the investment decisions. If this question remains unanswered, it could lead to them making poor investment decisions that could potentially hurt the company’s financial standing. Most importantly, I hope my analysis will provide the companies with conviction in their investment decisions. While many of us have sentiments based on news and other information we gather daily, it is hard to have conviction in your investment decisions if that is all you are basing it off. I hope to provide security and conviction to the company by using historical data to inform what is likely to come on a short and long-term basis, based on decades of history.

Data Acquisition:  I used a combination of financial data, mostly coming from FRED, a database that includes a plethora of historical time series data. I compiled a dataset including market data, macroeconomic data and sentiment analysis data as well. Sentiment Analysis is crucial to financial market movements, so it was important for me to find a way to incorporate this into my dataset. I used a pre-trained Financial Natural Language Proscessing model to scan articles for each day and denote a score for the article as "positive", "negative", or "neutral". My hope is that this combined with my market and economic data will allow me to train a model that can use this data to predict what may be to come.

Methodology: 
Upon finishing my exploratory data analysis I concluded that weekly data I had was not strong enough to actually be predictive. While weekly data is great for capturing the general movements, I believe it is much less prepared to help us understand the rapid movements we see day-to-day at times in financial markets. This inspired me to acquire daily data to try and identify a model with predictive power that I can use to aid small companies in having conviction in their financial decisions.

When it comes to financial modeling, capturing the sequential aspect of the data is essential to building a useful model. Financial markets can move very quickly, especially when fear enters the market, like during COVID and the 2008 financial crisis. I wanted to show how important this aspect is when modeling financial data, so I built a standard linear regression model and multiple AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average models. Also, to generate a baseline of model performance I created a 'naive' model called a "Random Walk". This model uses the previous day's actual return as the next day's prediction. On average, the random walk was able to predict the S&P 500's next day to within 1.27% which is poor, as 1.27% is a huge change in a single days market movements. 

My linear regression was built simply to see how a model that did not capture time series data would perform. Next, I built a baseline model called Random Walk. This model assumes that the best prediction for the next week is the result of last week. This is what I used to base the success of my other models on. Finally, I built two different ARMA models, one that used only the final close price (ARIMA) of the S&P500 and the date, and then another that factored in a plethora of other features as well (SARIMAX). Finally I built an LSTM, a recurrent neural network this is the most modern way to build a financial model and is known for being able to pick up on non-linear relationships from data that other models can struggle to capture.

Results:
Firstly, my initial thoughts were confirmed with a standard linear regression as it was an ineffective model. I had the most success with my 2 different ARMA models. I came to the conclusion that the ARIMA would be best for predicting several weeks or months in advance, while the SARIMAX was the most practical in predicting day-to-day movements. The ARIMA performed the best best, but had very little variance between predictions, this means that for most days, it was predicting a return of around .3%. While over a longer time period this could make sense to use, this would be highly ineffective at predicting a singular day in the market. The SARIMAX takes many other factors into consideration, which I think makes the predictions more useful for day-to-day use. While on average the predictions are about 1% off each day, this would be a more effective approach than using a 'naive' approach. To be completely honest, I wouldn't reccomend using any of the models to solely base financial decisions off of. However, I think this is a great tool to create or maintain conviction in your financial decisions, by using it as a confirmation tool. I would reccomend going forward to keep these tools as a conviction generator for your financial decisions. Do this by using the SARIMAX to confirm any day-to-day theories or ideas, and the ARIMA to estimate over a longer term where the S&P 500 could move to. To use these models scoll up to the link above and use the ARIMA and SARIMAX models to create predictions from your own dataset for the time period you want to predict.
